---
title: "Glacier fluctuations in the northern Patagonian Andes (44°S) imply wind-modulated interhemispheric in-phase climate shifts during Termination 1"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/manus_2_2022
excerpt:
date: 2022-06-27
venue: 'Scientific Reports'
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 'https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-022-14921-4'
citation: 
---

**Soteres, R. L.**, Sagredo, E. A., Kaplan, M. R., Martini, M. A., Moreno, P. I., Reynhout, S. A., Schwartz, R., Schaefer, J. M. (2022) “Glacier fluctuations in the northern Patagonian Andes (44°S) imply wind-modulated interhemispheric in-phase climate shifts during Termination 1”. Scientific Reports, 12:10842

The Last Glacial Termination (T1) featured major changes in global circulation systems that led to a
shift from glacial to interglacial climate. While polar ice cores attest to an antiphased thermal pattern
at millennial timescales, recent well-dated moraine records from both hemispheres suggest in-phase
fluctuations in glaciers through T1, which is inconsistent with the bipolar see-saw paradigm. Here,
we present a glacier chronology based on 30 new 10Be surface exposure ages from well-preserved
moraines in the Lago Palena/General Vintter basin in northern Patagonia (~ 44°S). We find that
the main glacier lobe underwent profound retreat after 19.7 ± 0.7 ka. This recessional trend led to
the individualization of the Cerro Riñón glacier by ~ 16.3 ka, which underwent minor readvances at
15.9 ± 0.5 ka during Heinrich Stadial 1, during the Antarctic Cold Reversal with successive maxima at
13.5 ± 0.4, 13.1 ± 0.4, and 13.1 ± 0.5 ka, and a minor culmination at 12.5 ± 0.4 ka during Younger Dryas
time. We conclude that fluctuations of Patagonian glaciers during T1 were controlled primarily by
climate anomalies brought by shifts in the Southern Westerly Winds (SWW) locus. We posit that the
global covariation of mountain glaciers during T1 was linked to variations in atmospheric CO2
(atmCO2) promoted by the interplay of the SWW-Southern Ocean system at millennial timescales.
