---
title: "(Paleo)glacier studies in Patagonia over the past decades (1976-2020): A bibliometric perspective based on the Web of Science"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/manus_1_2023
excerpt:
date: 2023-12-22
venue: 'Journal of South American Earth Sciences'
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jsames.2022.104173'
citation: 
---

**Soteres, R. L.**, Sagredo, E. A., Kaplan, M. R., Moreno, P. I. (2023) “(Paleo)glacier studies in Patagonia over the past decades (1976-2020): A bibliometric perspective based on the Web of Science”. Journal of South American Earth Sciences, 122, 104173.

Patagonia features the most extensive glaciers of the Southern Hemisphere, excluding Antarctica, and a vast
inventory of glacial landforms, so it is thought to have played a key role in (paleo)glacier studies since the late
19th century. However, no systematic attempts to characterize the specific research trends and the scientific
community focused on Patagonian cryosphere have been conducted so far. To fill this gap, we analyzed the
metadata associated to 305 articles compiled from the Web of Science database following a bibliometric
approach covering the period between 1976 and 2020. Our results point to an irregular but net increase on the
number of contributions on Patagonian (paleo)glaciers. Mass balance analyses based on satellite data of presentday
glaciers and the reconstruction of past glacier activity by dating glacial landforms formed during the Last
Glacial Termination, were the most addressed topics during the analyzed period. Patagonian (paleo)glacier
studies are mostly published in generic Earth Sciences publications, followed by Quaternary and glaciological
journals. Most of the studies were led by scientists from the United Kingdom, followed by Chile, Argentina and
United States. In terms of collaborations, these studies can be divided into two main clusters, one composed by
researchers from United States, Chile and Argentina institutions, and another mostly composed by British researchers.
So far, the most prolific authors are nearly equally distributed in nationality, yet gender inclusion and
international collaborations are still caveats that must be solved. Even though our query on the Web of Science
missed highly influential (so-called) grey literature, such as local scientific journals and technical reports, the
reviewed scientific literature unambiguously indicates that Patagonia is a privileged location for (paleo)glaciers
studies worldwide and that it will continue offering vast opportunities to tackle critical questions related to
global cryosphere and past-to-present climate changes.
