---
title: "The glacial geomorphology of the Río Corcovado, Río Huemul and Lago Palena/Lago General Vintter outlet glaciers, northeastern Patagonia (43o S, 71o W)"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/manus_3_2020
excerpt:
date: 2020-02-20
venue: 'Journal of Maps'
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1080/17445647.2019.1736197'
citation: 
---

Leger, T. P. M., Hein, A. S., Bingham, R. G., Martini, M. A., **Soteres, R. L.**, Sagredo, E. A., Martínez, O. A. (2020). “The glacial geomorphology of the Río Corcovado, Río Huemul and Lago Palena/Lago General Vintter outlet glaciers, northeastern Patagonia (43o S, 71o W)”. Journal of Maps, 16:2, 651-668. 

This study presents the first detailed glacial geomorphological map of the sediment-landform
assemblages formed by three eastern outlet glaciers of the former Patagonian Ice Sheet. These
glaciers occupied the Río Corcovado, Río Huemul and Lago Palena/General Vintter valleys,
Chubut province, Argentina (43°S, 71°W). By combining remote sensing and field-mapping,
we build on previous ice-sheet scale mapping and geological surveys to provide highresolution
spatial information on local ice-contact glaciogenic, glaciofluvial, glaciolacustrine,
and subglacial landforms. Twenty-five landform types, many of which are newly mapped in
the region, were digitized as georeferenced shapefiles over a 5300 km2 area. This map
enables the identification of former ice-flow directions, relative ice-margin positions and
glaciofluvial drainage pathways for each preserved Quaternary glaciation. It also elucidates
the former areal extent, geolocation and spillways of glaciolacustrine bodies formed during
the last deglaciation. The map delivers an essential framework on which to build robust
glacier-scale geomorphological and geochronological reconstructions.

[Download](https://doi.org/10.1080/17445647.2019.1736197)
