---
title: "The mid-latitude hydrolaccolith of the Spanish Central System (Southern Europe): A top-to-bottom integration of geomatic, geophysical and sedimentary datasets for characterising a singular periglacial landform"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/manus_1_2024
excerpt:
date: 2023-10-12
venue: 'Land Degradation & Development'
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 'https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ldr.4968?af=R'
citation: 
---

Fernández-Lozano, J., Turú, V., Carrasco, R. M., **Soteres, R. L.**, Sánchez-Vizcaino, J., Karampaglidis, T., Ros, X., Merlo, O., Pedraza, J. (2024) “The mid-latitude hydrolaccolith of the Spanish Central System (Southern Europe): A top-to-bottom integration of geomatic, geophysical and sedimentary datasets for characterising a singular periglacial landform”. Land Degradation & Development, 35, 1029-1079

Permafrost study in the Spanish Central System (41N) has remained elusive in past
decades. Although numerous periglacial features have been described, none has
yielded conclusive information about the existence/distribution of permafrost across
these mountains. This work focuses on integrating light detection and ranging and
unmanned aerial vehicle data with geophysical methods and sedimentary records,
along with preliminary thermal information, for the comprehensive study of a frost
mound. The singularity of this feature resides in its location, currently dominated by
a seasonal frost regime, and its size reaching 59 m long, 22.5 m wide and 4 m high,
representing the largest landform of this type in Iberia. From top-to-bottom, the
internal structure comprises three resistivity units (G1, G2 and G3). The most superficial
unit (G1) consists of a sequence of burial soils alternating with sand and silts, with
pebbles and gravel at the bottom, followed by a high porous layer that belongs to a
landslide deposit (G2), likely composed of gravel and pebbles laying over unit G3
(bedrock). Calibrated 14C ages suggest this landform formed at least 4300 years
ago during the mid-Holocene. Finally, the preliminary surface thermal map indicates
the presence of sectors affected by strong thermal gradients likely driven by water
table variations. Our results conclude that the dynamics are primarily controlled by
the seasonal frost regime influencing local subsurface drainage, which allows us to
classify this landform as a hydrodynamic pingo-like structure. We also demonstrate
that our approach is suitable for assessing the evolution of this type of periglacial
landform. Implementing long-lasting annual monitoring programmes would help to
understand local periglacial dynamics better.

[Download](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ldr.4968?af=R)
