---
title: "Geophysiscal characterization of the El Cervunal kame complex (Sierra de Gredos, Iberian Central System): Insight of infill geometry and reconstruction of former glacial formations"
collection: publications
category: manuscripts
permalink: /publication/manus_3_2021
excerpt:
date: 2021-10-18
venue: 'Journal of Applied Geophysics'
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 'https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jappgeo.2021.104478'
citation: 
---

Granja-Bruña, J. L., Turu, V., Carrasco, R. M., Muñóz-Martín, A., Ros, X., Fernández-Lozano, J., **Soteres, R. L.**, Karampaglidis, T., López-Sáez, J. A., Pedraza, J. (2021). “Geophysiscal characterization of the El Cervunal kame complex (Sierra de Gredos, Iberian Central System): Insight of infill geometry and reconstruction of former glacial formations”. Journal of Applied Geophysics, 195, 104478.

Geological and geophysical studies in complex valley troughs provide a key record for the reconstruction of
paleoenvironmental conditions during the Quaternary. Here we present a study of the sedimentary infill of the El
Cervunal kame complex or El Cervunal trough (Sierra de Gredos, Iberian Central System) by means of a combined
interpretation of near-surface geophysical techniques supported by geomorphological and borehole data. A
set of 1D and 2D near-surface geophysical methods, including electrical (Vertical Electrical Sounding and 2D
Electrical Resistivity Tomography), seismic (2D Seismic Tomography and 1D Refraction Microtremor) and
Magnetic Resonance Sounding techniques, were used to test their applicability in providing better insight on the
infill nature and geometry. Because of greater sensitivity and higher resolution and coverage achieved with
resistivity methods, the electrical resistivity has proven to be the most informative physical parameter, while
seismic and magnetic resonance methods were complementary. The sedimentary infill was classified into three
geophysical units and five sub-units with their geological interpretation. Unit 1 consists of a postglacial sedimentary
sequence and includes alluvial-plain and alluvial-fan deposits. Units 2 and 3 below the postglacial unit
were interpreted as glacial sequences including kame (glacigenetic and fluvio-glacial) and morainic deposits,
respectively. Subsoil information combined with the geomorphological data enabled the partial reconstruction of
the map-view geometry of the morainic bodies at the El Cervunal trough. The results suggest a complex evolution
of the study area where erosive-sedimentary processes dominate, but also structural factors should be considered.
At least five well-differentiated stages can be established to explain the occurrence of the troug
